As a manager, you may be asked
to perform various HR activities
such as hire a new employee,
draft a new job description,
approve leave requests
and conduct performance reviews.
But before you do any of these,
you will need to know if
you have the authority to do so.
You may be delegated key authorities
in human resources, commonly referred to as HR.
To exercise these authorities appropriately,
you need to understand how they are delegated.
You must also be able to interpret
your organization's HR delegation instruments
and use them efficiently and effectively,
in consultation with the
appropriate subject matter experts.
In this section you will learn to
recognize who delegates authority
and who receives delegation, and
identify levels of authority required
to approve specific HR requests.
This section should take you
approximately 15 minutes to complete.
Parliament creates authorities through legislation
and from here deputy heads receive
certain HR-related authorities directly
from legislation and regulations, most
specifically from the Financial Administration Act
and the Public Service Employment Act.
In addition, the Public Service Employment Act
gives the Public Service Commission the authority
to make appointments to
and within the public service.
The Public Service Employment Act also authorizes
the Public Service Commission to delegate
appointment and appointment-related authorities
to deputy heads, for positions
within the jurisdiction.
Human resources authorities are divided into
directly conferred authorities
and delegated authorities.
Directly conferred authorities are those granted
directly to deputy heads and
those granted to the Public Service Commission.
The Public Service Commission may then delegate
additional authorities to deputy heads.
An individual may exercise delegated authorities
once they occupy the position to which authorities
have been associated, have completed the
necessary training, and received
their delegation from the deputy head.
The Public Service Commission sub-delegates
most appointments and appointment-related
authorities to deputy heads, who may then
sub-delegate the majority of these authorities
to managers.
This differs from many other HR-related authorities,
such as leave authorities, which may be exercised
by virtue of occupying a position,
while others require specialized training
to receive accreditation,
as is the case for Organization and Classification.
An individual may exercise sub-delegated authorities
for staffing once they occupy the position
to which authorities have been associated,
have completed the necessary training,
have received the delegation from the deputy head
and have signed the attestation.
In the case of appointment authorities,
they must be exercised by
a duly sub-delegated manager.
Although many people may be involved
in a selection process,
the sub-delegated manager remains accountable
and responsible for all decisions.
For an overview of delegations,
take a look at the Appointment Delegation
and Accountability Instrument and review the types
of authorities directly conferred to deputy heads,
as well as those granted to
the Public Service Commission.
Each organization has its own tools to delegate
authorities appropriately through managerial
levels. Generally speaking, an organization’s
HR delegation instrument describes a series of
activities and the authorization level
or levels associated with it.
An individual may only exercise authorities
for which they have received
appropriate delegation. Consult your
own organization’s instrument.
Take what you have learned into real life!
Your organization will have
its own ways of doing things.
As a result, sub-delegation varies from
one organization to another.
It is a good practice to question
if you have the authority to act
before making an HR decision.
Take a time out from the course
and ask your supervisor or an HR advisor
where you can find your organization’s
delegation instrument and how it should be used
for the decisions you are making.
Some human resources actions such as classification,
pay, staffing may involve exercising authorities
from multiple areas.
Test your knowledge by answering the following
questions. Select “Submit” when you are done.